Muchembled, Robert. *A History of Violence*. Translated by Jean Birrell. Cambridge: Polity, 2012.
==

Introduction
--

1:  "From the thirteenth to the twenty-first century, physical violence and brutality in human relationships were on a downward trajectory all over Western Europe. This is shown by the curve of homicides recorded in the judicial archives. The very high level of seven centuries ago first fell, by roughly half, in the years 1600--50. This was followed by a spectacular fall over the next three centuries, up to the 1960s, in which the number of cases dropped to a tenth of what it had been; subsequent decades have seen a slight but clear increase. Yet, throughout this period, age and sex patterns in the case of murder have remained remarkably constant, which raises many questions."

The rate of homicide by females has remain constant since the end of the Middle Ages: roughly 10%.

Most homicides are committed by males twenty to thirty years old.

Within Europe, there is a clear separation between the former USSR and Western Europe. In Russia, the murder rate was 28.4 per 100,000 in 2000; it comparison, it ranged between 0.7 and 1.9 in the European Community.

1:  Europe has managed to develop an effective system "for the management of male, and especially juvenile, violence."

1:  wars "require a different type of analysis"

1:  The changes since 1960 "may indicate a disturbing reversal of the trend."

2:  How to explain this? Some social scientists take aggression to be a biological fact. However, we must distinguish aggression from violence, "which is its ethical shaping by a civilization."

2:  The decrease in violence is primarily due to "the decrease in the number of fights between young males" and takes two forms. First, among the elite, the gradual disappearance of the duel; second, among the common, the gradual disappearance of "frequent manly confrontations and knife fights in public places." Both are attributable to the "radical change in the masculine notion of honour and in the pacification of human relations" in (1) public places and (2) the family. This is an aspect of what Norbert Elias has called the civilizing process.

2:  "Male aggression, though a biological reality, is also strongly influenced by society, religion and the state. The relatively rare appearance of women in this context is due to two factors. They do not often kill or injure each other, and when they are struck by men, it tends to be with a degree of moderation, as the latter often avoid sustained attacks on their faces, bellies or reproductive organs. This phenomenon may be explained by a natural inhibiting mechanism, which is useful for the survival of the species. However, it was also a result of imperative cultural models which required the daughters of Eve to demonstrate a gentleness specific to their sex, refrain from brutality and never carry a weapon."

2:  "the culture of violence has been essentially masculine in our world."

2:  "Under pressure from the legal system, its status gradually changed from that of a normal collective language, which had created social ties, and helped to validate the hierarchies of power and the relations between generations and sexes in the core communities, to that of a major taboo."

2:  "The West invented adolescence by way of a stronger symbolic tutelage over unmarried men. This process complemented the efforts of a new educational system intended to keep under much closer supervision an age group seen by the established authorities and adults as particularly turbulent, insubordinate and dangerous."

2:  "It was designed to limit the 'natural' aggression of the new male generations by imposing the prohibition of murder, with the increasing approval of the adults of their localities."

2-3;  "The principle change came around 1650, when, everywhere in a Europe ravaged by interminable wars, a strong hostility developed to the sight of blood. From this time on, the Western 'factory' reshaped individual behaviour, which was habitually violent, especially among the young, by a system of norms and rules of politeness which devalued armed confrontations, codes of personal vengeance, excessively harsh hierarchical relationships and relations between the sexes and age groups. This resulted, over the centuries, in a veritable transformation of the collective sensibility with regard to homicide, which culminated, during the industrial age, in its becoming a powerful taboo."

3:  "This change was not painless, except for many townspeople, who were much less hostile to being 'disarmed'. This was because the 'urban peace' had already, by the end of the late Middle Ages, lessened the violence of the inhabitants of towns more effectively than elsewhere." e.g., police

Notable groups opposing this transformation were (1) the aristocrats, who developed a culture of honour and duelling, which was reoriented towards the military in defence of, first, the prince and then, second, the nation and (2) the peasants, constituting the vast majority of the European population until the nineteenth century, fought to preserve its manly traditions, including through rather unsuccessful and violent armed revolts. 

3:  "More recently, the sudden emergence at the end of the twentieth century of the problems posed by the young rioters of the inner cities gives the impression that there has been a return of the repressed."

4:  "Even more than that of incest, the prohibition on male violence slowly turned into an obsession."

4:  "But it seems, at least, that there has been since the end of the Middle Ages a strong general correlation between outbreaks of juvenile violence and a disruption, for one reason or another, of the procedures for managing the replacement of the generations on European soil."

Chapter 1: What is Violence?
--

7:  "violence" derives from L. *vis* meaning force or vigour. Appeared in French at beginning of thirteenth century, "characterized a quick-tempered and brutal person." "It also described a power relationship aimed at subjecting or constraining another person." 

7:  "Western civilization gave violence a fundamental role. On the one hand, it fiercely denounced the excesses of violence and declared it illegitimate, recalling that diving law forbade the killing of another person; on the other, it gave violence an elevated, positive role and declared it legitimate, to validate the action of the knight who shed blood in defence of widows and orphans, and to defend the 'just' wars waged by Christian kings against the Infidel, troublemakers and enemies of the prince."

7:  "It has slowly and painfully exorcized the problem, and now regards human life as sacred and homicide as a major taboo."

Note the religious language surrounding human bodies, lives and violence.

8:  "A true 'culture of war' has presided from its origins over the development of the West, even intensifying with the Great Discoveries."

8:  "Western culture was fertile territory for other types of violence because it was based on a manly ethic which elevated brute force into a model of behaviour, particularly in the profoundly unequal societies of the Middle Ages and the *ancien régime*. The second sex was left with little more than the role of weak, unarmed women, necessarily dependent, protected by males who derived pleasure from them and demanded they provide them with sons to continue the lineage. Nobles or commoners, powerful or weak, all men were educated in the context of a 'culture of violence' based on the need to defend masculine honour against rivals. The brutality of human relations was a universal social language, considered normal and necessary in the West until at least the seventeenth century. Until its slow monopolization by the state and the nation, violence shaped the masculine personality according to the noble model of manliness and the mastery of the use of weapons demanded of every aristocrat; it thus created, in opposition, the model of the weak woman. Until the disarmament of the ordinary population, which was slowly and painfully achieved on princely orders from the seventeenth century, the lowest male shared this ethic and wielded a knife or sword with ease and without much respect for human life."

8-9:  "The social sciences, those remarkable products of the Western genius in the nineteenth century, have recently turned their attention to the question of homicidal violence. Their common discourse of devaluation with regard to this 'criminal' phenomenon usually ignores its socially structuring aspects and the positive forms it could assume in the eyes of both actors and governments in the Middle Ages and the sixteenth century. We need to go back to this fact if we are to achieve a proper understanding of the problem and reveal the causes of the massive changes of the last five hundred years."

9:  "In legal terms, violence designates crimes against persons, including homicide, assault and rape. The classification of these phenomena is not the same in all countries and at all periods.... Specialists in the *ancien régime* generally omit infanticide, on the grounds that it is particularly under-recorded. Offences against property form a separate category today, although some robberies are accompanied by aggravated, even lethal, violence. The statistics for the anglophone countries, both recent and old, clearly distinguish two types of homicide, premediated and unpremediated, the latter designated as manslaughter. Such a lack of standardization illustrates wide differences in the way homicide has been perceived in the various countries, and even more the various periods, considered here."

9:  "The general characteristics of homicide pose a major puzzle. The profile of the typical offender has changed very little since the thirteenth century, in spite of the considerable decline in recorded numbers observed all over in Europe. Women are in a tiny minority. The majority of murderers are young men aged between twenty and twenty-nine. Under the *ancien régime*, their victims often resembled them in age and sex and the murderous confrontations usually revolved round issues of rights, precedence and honour. Members of the wealthiest and most privileged groups were no less involved than others. The marked decline in lethal violence from the seventeenth century seems to be linked both to the general pacification of public space and to the abandonment by young men of good families of this type of confrontation; they turned instead to duels, until these were, in due course, criminalized. Most lethal violence continues today to be committed by young men who are poorly qualified and come largely from working-class or poor backgrounds. This reveals not only an economic and social divide, but a major cultural difference: violent behaviour has been more quickly and more easily eradicated by education, morality and pervading pressures among young men from the upper social ranks."

10:  "These observations suggest that violence is not a purely innate phenomenon. It can be distinguished from aggression, which is a potentiality for violence, whose destructive power can be inhibited by civilizations--if they decide to do this, and if there is sufficient acceptance among those affected for their views to be imposed."

10:  "Our civilization has resolved this major contradiction by adopting a very fluid semantic use of the concept of violence. It has, at the same time, imposed a blanket prohibition on it. Specialists distinguish two antagonistic meanings of the term. The first identifies the violence at the heart of life: all living creatures are driven to predatory or defensive behaviour when threatened. But man is not an ordinary animal, it is argued, and he is without a conscious desire to destroy his fellows."

11:  "At most, they [historians] may note that past centuries have bequeathed us a double conception of violence: legitimate when employed by institutions, such as states when they wage war, or churches when they persecute 'heretics'; illegitimate when committed by individuals in opposition to the law or morality. This fundamental ambiguity stems from the fact that human violence is both biological and cultural."

13:  "Yet destructive aggression is a male affair. In contemporary Europe, only 10 per cent of murderers are women, which was also the case in thirteenth-century England. The variations recorded in the seven centuries since have been slight." 

13:  "For the latter, it is the construction of human beings by their culture that is important. The essential link is not that between violence and masculinity, because this is a biological given. It is that established with manliness, a notion defined by each society in the context of the determination of the sexual 'genders' whose existence it recognizes. Until quite recently, the West accepted only two, and established a powerful functional inequality between them."

14:  "The crime that is most feared, like paedophilia in France today, is the one that represents an intolerable threat to the collective values on which the permanence of a civilization is based. In which case, the punishment far exceeds the crime, so as to allow a general repair of the torn social and cultural fabric."

14:  "Its real acceptance can even be dated to the age of the absolute monarchs, when a massive theoretical and judicial effort was made to 'discipline' populations appalled by the terrible Wars of Religion between 1562 and 1648. With the restoration of order, at different dates in different countries, male homicide and female infanticide were made inexpiable crimes. The death penalty was employed much more frequently than in the past for these offences, and it performed a symbolic function by defining the supreme danger, and eradicating it."

15:  Referring to lese-majesty and grotesque executions, such as of Ravaillac and Damiens. "One of the most visible signs of its success was its progress, however gradual, in disarming populations, curtailing the excesses of the noble duel and punishing the most dangerous criminals. The system provided a growing sense of security."

15:  "The number of homicides fell sharply in Western Europe in the first half of the seventeenth century, whereas the number of death penalties for this crime greatly increased. Whereas murder and the killing of newborn babies had previously been regarded as fairly banal occurrences, only half-heartedly and not very effectively pursued by the courts, these now assumed the status of major crimes and became closely bound up with the concept of lese-majesty. In the eighteenth century, the priorities shifted once again, in the direction of crimes against property, at a time of strong economic and commercial growth. In both England and France, the two great rivals on the European and world stage, robbery became, in its turn, the most unacceptable of crimes. Death sentences were increasingly often passed on those guilty of it, especially in London and Paris, the two greatest commercial centres in Europe."

16:  "The emergence of a new type of serious crime and, in its wake, a harsher repression of associated transgressions is a consequence of a change in the basic values underpinning this culture. At the beginning of the twenty-first century, the judicial focus in the West has shifted again. The worst crimes are now linked to the preservation of the lives and sexual innocence of children. At a time when the death penalty has been abolished in Europe, it is symptomatic that those who talk of possible exceptions refer to this threat to children, now designated as the most unspeakable crime that a human being can commit."

16:  "By brandishing the threat of the death penalty for those who dared to kill, they strengthened their control over their subjects. This had not been the case in the European societies of the immediately preceding centuries. Then less strictly controlled by the state, they had allowed more latitude to the local and regarded the death of a human being with a degree of indifference, in the context of a culture in which male violence was the norm."

Muchembled notes, "In these circumstances, aggression had a positive value." Aggression and violence have a valence and that valence is culturally determined.
	
16-7:  "Male murderers were treated even more leniently if they were young, because the adults of their locality tolerated displays of violence in the belief that youth must have its fling. It is because of this that it was young men aged between twenty and twenty-nine who were most likely to commit murder. During their long wait for marriage, both in the countryside and in the towns, young men in this age group adopted a culture of bachelor gangs. These were based on competition between peers to enhance their value in the eyes of the girls and to compensate for the frustrations associated with this uncomfortable state, between childhood and full adulthood. Their principal concern was to extol a manliness which made them exist in the eyes of others. They carried weapons, in particular knives or swords, and used them freely in fights intended to demonstrate their valour, inflicting or receiving wounds which infection and the inadequacies of contemporary medicine often rendered fatal. Young noblemen, trained for combat and imbued with an equally manly warrior ethic, were not fundamentally different in this regard from the peasantry, before their isolation after the invention of the rules of the aristocratic duel in the sixteenth century."

17:  "Not all unmarried men were killers. Only a tiny minority committed murder. The highest homicide rate recorded for the thirteenth century is a little over 100 murders for every 100,000 inhabitants. Given that women were rarely involved, we may deduce a maximum of 100 murderers for every 50,000 men, all ages included, that is, about 0.2 per cent of the contingent. Young unmarried men probably accounted for scarcely more than a fifth of the male population in the demographic conditions of the time and provided less than half this total. In other words, at most one young man in a thousand committed murder. To kill one of one's peers was by no means the norm, even if it happened a hundred times more often than in our own day."

17:  "The homicide rate fell on average to 10 per 100,000 in the first half of the seventeenth century. The decline is spectacular. There was a tenfold decline in the number of young male murderers, a sign of the retreat of the culture of manly violence in the face of the advance of a new intolerance, conveyed by many other means than the law alone. The Western 'factory' was inventing adolescence as a dangerous age, which must be closely controlled so as to prevent it lethal excesses. After that, the trend speeded up, to produce a rate of around 1 per cent in the middle of the twentieth century, a hundred times lower than in the Middle Ages."

18:  "In the England of the early twenty-first century, homicide is primarily a male affair. The murderer and his victim usually know each other, or are even related, and, in nearly half of all cases, they have quarrelled. They are mostly aged between sixteen and thirty-five. The most common weapon, used in 28 per cent of cases, is a sharp implement."

18:  "Homicide is a social construction."

18:  "The principal target in the case of murder is the young male, impatiently waiting to reach maturity and accede to the advantages of adult life, who transgresses the most sacred codes by killing one of his peer group. On the one hand, society urges him to define himself by reference to an ethic of manliness; on the other, it exhorts him to keep his cool and learn the self-control necessary to avoid this inexpiable crime. It forbids him to engage in illegitimate physical violence, the latter defined in opposition to the violence decreed by the community and employed in its service, for example in the just war."

18:  "The rapid decline in homicide rates since the seventeenth century testifies to the increasing success of social control in this sphere. Murder has become a residual phenomenon in our societies. So far has this gone that aggression is now primarily associated with society's marginals and losers."

18-9:  "The distaste for blood and the taboo on violence have been the cornerstones of the Western system since it embarked on the conquest of the globe some five hundred years ago. Stamped with the seal of absolute illegitimacy in the internal relations of societies these have enabled states to appropriate a monopoly of legitimate force, both in war and in the use of the death penalty, until its recent abolition. They have also helped to assure the least conflictual possible transmission between generations, by making the implicit contract forged between them dependent on the younger generation acquiring mechanisms for the pacification of their behaviour. The management of the patrimony must continue to be assured on the previous model, by good family men, so that the hard core of murderers, often from poor backgrounds, can all the more justifiably be excluded from the 'normal' succession. When the young become too numerous, after a period of peace and demographic growth, intergenerational tensions increase and youth violence returns in a big way."

19:  "The taming of manly aggression was part of a wider phenomenon, the social and cultural pact on which the state and the whole of Western civilization were based. This aggression, a biological reality, was strongly shaped and oriented by the dominant forces for cohesion, in order to produce an exemplary ordinary subject who was not constantly challenging the values or norms of his community, national or local. Europe achieved the feat of producing sociability on the basis of a particularly unstable element, the sexuality of young men."

19-20:  "The pivot on which everything turned was manliness. Until the changes of the late twentieth century, the position of the male, whatever his social status, was strongly correlated with the assertion of his heterosexuality, but much less than before with the need to demonstrate it violently in the theatre of everyday life. Women, meanwhile, had to remain in their place so as to confirm the man as a man. The passivity required by the cultural norms constructed the woman as a gentle and helpless creature, normally incapable of murderous violence. A woman who behaved aggressively seemed abnormal, even totally Other."

20:  "The child was now seen as innocent by nature. If one child killed another, that child was assumed to be profoundly evil or diabolic."

20:  "Our civilization no longer wants to contemplate violence by women and probably underestimates the violence they suffer. It has for centuries preferred to focus on the 'civilizing woman', whose mission is to soften behaviour, turn men away from violence and restrain the brutality of their sexual desires. While it is clear that women play a fundamental role in cultural transmission, nothing proves that they have always conceived their role as that of docile and obedient sheep."

21:  "It [female violence] was still part of a 'culture of violence' which extended to the whole of the population. Children were brought up both to suffer violence and to practise it. Little shepherd boys defended their territory against the flocks of other villages, using their crooks and slings, causing serious and sometimes fatal injuries to adversaries of their own aga. Everybody was violent at the end of the Middle Ages and in early modern times."

21:  "There were precise codes and rituals regulating the brutality of human relations. In this world of proximity, a strict sense of honour obliged men to avenge not only their own honour, which was based on the overt demonstration of manliness, but that of their whole family group, while women were kept closely supervised to protect their sexual purity or their virtue."

21-2:  "The juvenile culture of violence in the fifteenth- and sixteenth-century West was based on identical rules. The sharp implement, sword or knife, was a symbolic representation of the individual, who endured an extended purgatory between childhood and marriage, and who had to prove that he was capable of acceding to manhood. Young men banded together into gangs in the evening after work and on Sundays and holidays. Their aggression was mainly directed against each other, as they were competitors in a tight marriage market. The rest of the time, they flirted with girls, often collectively. THey went to great lengths to win their sexual favours. This was in spite of the close watch kept on young girls, not only by their fathers and brothers, but by the women of all ages who surrounded them whenever they were at risk, especially during the collective evening get-togethers or in the fields, at the wash-house or at the mill. The position of grown lads was an uncomfortable one; they represented a third population group, in relation to the dominant adult males and the weaker sex, as female sociability encompassed all ages and even included pre-pubescent boys. In this context, the injuries inflicted and murders committed by young men were treated indulgently by their elders, by the local authorities, by the law and by the king himself, who was free with his pardons. This was probably a price that had to be paid to prevent bachelors, frustrated and kept in close tutelage, from more frequently turning on the established males who monopolized power and women. In any case it encouraged a regular cycle of extreme violence, ruled by the law of honour and the law of vengeance."

22:  "The transition from private vengeance, based on the collective defence of honour, to the banning of homicide was neither quickly nor easily achieved. The first, and most rapid, stage, which took some two centuries, involved separating young men of good family from the common, violent cultural model. The invention of the meticulously codified duel helped to make this possible."

22:  "Periods of crisis in the transmission of values, at times of juvenile overpopulation, led to their revival on a significant scale at fairly regular intervals. The members of inner-city gangs at the beginning of the twenty-first century are practising a concept of manly honour which was some echoes to that of the young men of earlier centuries, in that the destructive effects of their aggression are felt primarily by their peers. This can still be seen as a mechanism that allows some of it to be deflected away from adults, even though it is the latter who are primarily responsible for the strict controls imposed on these young men."

23:  Homicide is residual in Europe, but much more prevalent in other places: United States, Russia, Eastern Europe.

23:  Must pay attention to (1) male, (2) twenty to twenty-nine. "A satisfactory explanation can only be found in the long term, and must give due weight to the problem of the transition to full adulthood."

23:  "Economic conditions have a role in determining levels of human aggression, but they are not, on their own, a sufficient explanation. The peaks of youth violence are not closely correlated with a general deterioration in living standards, but rather with situations of demographic surplus, against a backdrop of malaise caused by particular difficulties in integrating, for example in the banlieues of Paris today."

23-4:  "Elias identified a new model of the individual, increasingly less impulsive, controlled by the more effective disciplines put in place by churches and states, and capable of exercising greater self-control of his instincts. Two crucial forces, he argued, led to this transformation of the personality: the modern state and the market economy which developed in the big towns, such as London and Paris. On the one hand, the state claimed a monopoly of legal violence and demanded that behaviour be pacified, beginning with the noble warriors, who had to accept the refinement of etiquette and the obligations of a politeness which prohibited the overt expression of aggression. On the other, trade, then rapidly expanding, both led to and demanded a restriction of inter-personal violence; it could only prosper in conditions of freedom and security, said Enlightenment thinkers such as Adam Smith."

24:  Problems with the "Leviathan Theory" because decline in homicide is an independent variable of state centralization: "The weakness of this argument lies in the fact that the sharp decline in homicide is visible at the same time, in the first decades of the seventeenth century, in absolute states like Sweden and France and in states lacking centralized structures, such as the United Provinces and England. Nor can the growth of means of coercion really explain this phenomenon, as the Italian towns of the Renaissance, though equipped with large police forces, were unable to reduce significantly the high volume of everyday conflictuality."

24:  "It seems more pertinent to seek the cause in a higher level of acceptance by subjects of the legitimacy of the state, whatever its type."

25-6:  "The shift from the regulation of violence by families to a system controlled by states, and also churches, happened in the context of the growth of 'social discipline'.... The period is characterized by a spate of edicts designed to limit the occasions for sin, forbidding dissolute practices, dancing, attending many festivals and taverns during religious services, the abuse of alcoholic drinks, the carrying of weapons, etc. The supervision of behaviour, in particular of the excesses committed by young men, intensified in both Protestant and Catholic countries. Its effects were clearly neither immediate nor complete, because there was strong resistance in the rural world and among the poorer citizens. The children of good family, targeted by the pedagogues of both camps and subject to stricter moral surveillance, felt the effects at an early stage. They were not only educated in a new way, but given a new type of training in relational life, through the codes of politeness which developed the model of the 'perfect gentleman', for example in France from the 1630s."

25:  "In a world where every individual--and not just the nobles--had his own, honour was directly linked to sex, status and age. It also expressed collective values, in contrast to the cultures of personal guilt of a later date. Everyone was closely supervised by their fellows and lost status in the eyes of all if they did not behave in the correct way. The law of shame ruled this world, where the regard of others mattered much more than self-regard. This resulted in a very dense network of norms and requirements, characteristic of a society of proximity and reciprocal surveillance. If dishonour fell on an individual, it contaminated all the members of his 'clan', his close family, relatives, neighbours, friends--even the whole of a village or urban district if an aggressor from another parish could later boast of having humiliated those of the first. Murderous violence was simply a reflection of the intensity of the collective feelings which bound an individual to his group, to the point where vengeance became a sacred obligation, essential to the restoration of the collective honour that had been besmirched. Not only did the purity of women have to be defended as a supreme value by all the men, but the men had to avoid losing face in public if their manliness was challenged, if they were the subject of insults, threats or even jokes. To give way before an aggressor, to be beaten or defamed, was dishonourable not only for the one directly concerned, but for all his relatives, who would force him to respond even if he had no wish to."

25:  "In this context, violence was both legitimate and obligatory in order to escape shame."

26:  "This use of public humiliation to smooth away conflicts and allow the reintegration of the culprit into the community was slow to disappear."

26:  "The new severity of the courts, the invention of the police in the Paris of Louis XIV and the shocking example of the many young people hanged for theft on the gibbets of Tyburn, in London, all helped to accustom subjects to the heavy-handed protection of the state. It was integrated into a new culture of personal guilt, which left less space than before to the collective sense of honour and the law of shame."

29-30:  "Young males had to abandon the violence linked to the code of collective honour in favour of a culture of personal guilt defined by the moral pressure of the age; this was necessary in order to alter the repetitive mechanism by which property and founding principles were transmitted to the new generations, on a continent where 80 per cent of the population were peasants. Thus the West invented adolescence, a stage of life that was more clearly defined and more supervised, in order to impose everywhere the new dynamism of the states, churches and towns, including on the rural masses deeply attached to traditions of social fixity. The aim was not only to prevent young men from endangering the peace of the communities, but also to teach them a new approach to life, respect for it, and the obedience due to the institutions proclaiming themselves guardians of legitimate violence."

30:  "As the interior was pacified, the violence of the young males, beginning with the sons of good families, was partially reoriented towards the exterior...."

Chapter 2: Violence: Seven Centuries of Spectacular Decline
---

31:  Records do not reflect an accurate picture of conflict/violence in the past (or present), but a reflection of "a normative gaze directed at what contemporaries considered the worst threats." As a result, we can use this data "as indicators of the major shifts in the perception of violence against persons during the last seven centuries."

32:  Homicide is especially important because Western Christianity, at least, pays lip-service to homicide as a particularly bad crime. Furthermore, it is rather difficult to hide the evidence of homicide, which means that there is a great degree of knowledge about dead/killed persons. This is especially true as the time period under consideration approaches the present. Notwithstanding this, there are some problems with counting homicides in medieval and early modern Europe, such as in France.

32:  "Only infanticide, although it was criminalized by 1557 in France, was until quite recently the subject of a powerful law of silence, within the locality and within the family. THis is probably the chief reason why researches working on the pre-industrial period do not, as a general rule, include the figures for infanticide in those for homicide, regarding them as having little credibility."

32:  Reliability on the figures for homicide in part depend upon the effectiveness of punitive practices. "Before the advent of crime figures, an innovation signalling the recent prioritizing of repression, justice was more formidable in appearance than in reality. Many offenders slipped easily through the gaping holes in a system only loosely administered by the small number of officials responsible for maintaining order. At the end of the Middle Ages, and often still in the sixteenth century, plenty of murderers fled without leaving any trace in the archives, except, sometimes, in the well-managed towns where those it had been possible to identify were condemned to death in absentia or sentenced to formal banishment. It was also necessary for a complaint to have been made or a rumour to have spread, as public action was not automatic. Other indirect documents, such as the *levées de cadavres* ('collection of corpses') from the public highways, show that homicides were significantly under-recorded."

32:  Royal pardons (*lettres de rémission*, *lettres de rappel de ban*, and *lettres de pardon*) are another interesting source: "they prohibited any possible action, even already embarked on, against the recipients, who were authorized to return if they had been banished, and annulled any penalty decreed by a court."

32-3:  "It is estimated that more than 50,000 *lettres de rémission* were granted by the kings of France between 1304 and 1568, which was when the series ended, though not the practice, which continued up to the Revolution. Nearly 15,000 such *lettres* were issued under Charles VI, between 1380 and 1422. Another significant spate started in 1480. This went together with a systematic concentration on acts of violence which ended in homicide. This had been the case, in 1525, with 208 of the 218 individuals pardoned by Francis I, that is, 95 per cent of the total."

33:  "Far from being immobile, this was a world characterized by a very high birth rate and probably an equally high death rate, due to war, disease and famine. In spite of a 'massacre of the innocents' which continued into adolescence (only one newborn child in two reached the age of twenty), and in spit of low life expectancy (at most another twenty years for the survivors), this was a society significantly more subject than our own to pressure from the new generations."

33:  "In the absence of effective contraception, the chief mechanism regulating the population was an increasing delay in the age of marriage, which limited the number of children per woman."

34:  In the context of a rising average age of marriage (girls marrying at 20, boys between 24-5 in the sixteenth century; girls marrying at 25, boys at 27 in the seventeenth century) there was also a decline in the number of illegitimate births and pre-marital children were rare. This suggests strong regulation of sexuality, especially of boys. Sexual outlets were limited: "understand widows or married women, by engaging in masturbation, especially heterosexual, with girls anxious to avoid pregnancy, or by devising ways of letting off steam."

34:  One of the primary mechanisms for "letting off steam" is very significant: "One of the most important of these was implementing a notably manly ethic of confrontation between gangs of unmarried youths, which was readily tolerated by the adults and the authorities. The injuries or homicides that resulted were regarded with great indulgence as the inevitable consequences of the irrepressible explosive temperament attributed to young bachelors."

37:  "Contrary to a mistaken but commonly held idea, the town was no more inclined to criminality than the countryside. [...] Unlike the small towns close to Flanders, like Béthune and Aire, the larger cities were reducing lethal violence. Indeed it was much more closely controlled here than in the countryside, both by urban privileges and by procedures for defending the collective peace. Further, by tradition, criminals who fled from Arras were threatened with a terrible fate: any man could claim immunity if he killed a fugitive sentenced to a fine of 60 *livres*, the usual rate for the crime of murder."

37:  "It [lethal violence] was not one of the authorities' main preoccupations, unlike theft, which was committed by 20 per cent of women and at least 22 per cent of unmarried men between 1528 and 1549. The fact that 90 percent of those guilty offences against property had been born outside Arras, and that the principal penalty, in 87 per cent of cases, was banishment, accompanied by shaming punishments, such as cutting off the ears, in 10 per cent of cases, suggests a desire to exclude strangers, especially rootless youth."

38:  "There is today a general consensus regarding the great underestimation of the figures from before the nineteenth century if they are based solely on judicial documents. This only makes the seven-century-long decline in lethal violence in the West the more spectacular and interesting."

38:  Discussing Ted Robert Gurr, 1981, "Historical Trends in Violent Crime," *Crime and Justice: An Annual Review of Research*, Vol. 3, 295-353. The chart in question is on page 313. "The homicide rate was very high at the beginning of the period--around 20 per 100,000 inhabitants on average, with spikes of 110 in Oxford and nearly 45 in London; it then fell by half, to about 10, in 1600, before plummeting to settle at around 1 in the twentieth century; this was in spite of a perceptible rise in the last decades [1960-] of his period."

38:  "Gurr correctly perceived this as a major cultural shift in Western society, the result of a heightened sensitivity regarding violence and of the growth of internal and external methods for the control of aggression."

38-9:  "They are a description not so much of the criminal reality as of changes in the repressive approach, linked to the success, over the long term, of a patient battle to strengthen social control in this sphere and to impose greater personal self-control over lethal violence."

39:  Kent, England from 1560 to 1985 show a decline of 3-6 to 0.3-0.7/100,000; Amsterdam 50/100,000 in 1400s to 1/100,000 in 1800s.

39:  "The Middle Ages generally presents a very high level of murderous violence. The lowest rate recorded is 6 and the highest 150 per 100,000, with very marked variations according to region, but also significant differences between big cities, small towns and the country-side [...]"

40:  Three observations:

1. "the principal changes are not linked to wars, except negatively--the excess of legal murder seemingly having served to sicken contemporaries and reduce the number of criminal murders."
2. Seems to be pronounced in Protestant rather than Catholic regions, "which seems to have helped to raise the value of human life."
3. "this ethic affected primarily the younger generations, in whom it was inculcated by the Churches and the various socializing institutions."

40:  "The key to the problem is surely to be found, therefore, in young men, and in the way in which the European 'factory' taught them the meaning of life and respect for the life of others."

40:  "Women rarely account for more than 15 per cent of the total number of those who commit murder. The average stands between 5 and 12 per cent and has remained remarkably stable since the thirteenth century. Murderous violence is a male crime, and essentially an affair of young men of marriageable age [...]"

41:  "in New York between 1976 and 1995, the peak age for murder was twenty among males."

41:  Looking at Europe (Mantua, Amsterdam, France, Alençon, and Germany), "reveals a startlingly similar model in all cases with a concentration of between 35 and 45 per cent of murderers from the 20-29 age group. The curve takes the form of a slightly dissymmetric bell: the 10-19 age group accounts for between 5 and 20 per cent of the total, almost as many as the 40-49 age group; the 30-39 age group provides between 20 and 30 per cent of the those accused, the percentage among older groups being negligible."

41:  "The fluctuations recorded over the centuries seem to be primarily linked to changes in the status of this age, which would be called 'adolescence' in the industrial erra, and in particular to factors associated with the difficulty of becoming a full adult, acceding to the married state and finding a valued place in society."

41-2:  "The principal explanatory hypothesis explored in this book relates to the mechanisms for the replacement of the masculine generations and the turbulence associated with periods marked by greater difficulties in achieving this transition. Homicidal violence is both an expression and a symptom of this, through judicial repression and against a backdrop of the imposition of greater social control and the growth of mechanisms of self-control among the vast majority, who avoided murderous brawls. From the seventeenth century, such clashes are primarily a sign of the limitations and failures of these collective cultural practices. The marked secular decline in murder thus demonstrates the increasing effectiveness of the management of young men by the European 'factory'. In the beginning, the most extreme youth violence had been not only accepted, but actively encouraged, as a way of fostering a manly ethic among both the peasantry and, even more, the nobility, whose vocation was to become ruthless warriors. This is why murder was so common at the end of the Middle Ages and for a long time after."

43:  "In parallel, a culture of knife fights, the original model for the noble duel with swords, continued to thrive over the centuries. It was a typical expression of masculine honour. Though it was practised by all sectors of the population in the Middle Ages and the sixteenth century, it was particularly common among unmarried men. It was not normally meant to kill. Rather, it took the form of ritual challenges intended to establish a visible superiority, so as to increase value in a tight marriage market ruled by the laws of endogamy and homogamy. Three-quarters of spouses, and an even higher proportion in the villages, came from the same place and the same socio-professional group. Knives and swords were assertions of manliness between protagonists of the same age who usually knew each other well. In Artois, France, England, Sweden and Cologne, the typical quarrel flared after a visit to the local tavern on a Sunday or a holiday, and between young bloods who were armed and anxious to shine in the eyes of all, or seduce a watching girl or avenge an affront. The wounds, which were not usually mortal, became infected, although their essential function had often been to assert a victory or humiliate an adversary. Advances in surgery are partly responsible for the decline in homicide rates from the eighteenth century, by preventing these unintended disastrous consequences. But this was not the main reason for the decline. These manly games were denounced with increasing vigour by the authorities, who began to punish the offenders harshly, steeping up the number of death sentences. The fall in homicide rates is in large part testimony to the success of the offensive conduct against adolescents who were too ready to engage in knife fights."

Chapter 3: The Youth Festivals of Violence (Thirteenth to Seventeenth Centuries)
---

45:  "Only its extreme froms, premeditated murder committed out of hatred or revenge and parricide, were in practice liable to a death sentence. The penal theories [...] advocated a rigorous prosecution in these rare cases [...]. Other types of murder, described as 'manslaughter' in England, were universally regarded with a high degree of indulgence and rarely brought to the attention of judicial authorities. As a result, bloody cruelty was commonplace. To understand why, we need to relocate it in the normal context of human relationships. Life was steeped in brutality [...] in the ordinary way of things, and for both sexes, irrespective of social condition and age--babies were no more likely to escape it than old people. Deeply rooted in human life, violence was in no way a taboo in this period. [...] it had a positive value, maintaining the hierarchies and regulating material and symbolic exchanges. Even more, it presided over the world of play and the world of work. Just as the cemetary was in the middle of the village, around the parish church, the taste for blood was at the heart of a culture of violence which shaped social and sexual roles. [...] the essential norms were based on the expression of an exaggerated manliness."

46:  "Men in the making, pubescent boys were under great pressure to distance themselves from the feminine world by visible acts of great brutality, because they needed to demonstrate their capacity to replace, one day, their fathers. Relegated to the margins of the two worlds they valued most, those of power and sexuality, they vented their frustrations by demonstration their physical power and their skills during festivals and games."

47:  "Violence did not of itself lead to social exclusion, unlike theft, which gave rise to more fear and contempt, especially in the towns. Fights, injuries and homicides were part of the landscape at the end of the Middle Ages, to the point where it has been possible to see them as characterizing the lifestyle of the citizen elites."

48:  "The meticulousness of the stipulations with regard to a wide range of threats and acts of violence, both verbal and actual, testifies to the existence of very brutal everyday relationships."

49:  "A duty of violence existed. Thus the students of the Norman nation at the university of Paris summoned their members, at the beginning of the fourteenth century, to ask whether they should take up arms and attack the members of another nation. After a vote in favour, the ensuing battle left one clerk wounded and another dead."

49-50:  "Parricide, matricide and infanticide were extremely rare according to these sources, as were instances of masters killing servants."

50:  "Homicide was overwhelmingly masculine: 91 per cent of the accused were men, as were 80 per cent of the victims recorded in the eyre rolls. Women provided one victim in five but fewer than one in ten of those accused. This under-representation has been a constant in our culture, still visible today, and in the same proportions. It reflects a powerful social prohibition, the unacceptability of female violence. Not only were women not taught to use violence to resolve a conflict, unlike men, but they did not carry weapons and were not trained in their use."

50:  "The judicial alchemy tended to minimize the responsibility of men but maximize the guilt of women, which led to one woman being sent to the scaffold for every four men."

51:  "Blows also formed a veritable relational language between men. They demonstrated their manliness and were used to assert their social position if it was challenged. Many men carried a weapon, if only the knife they used to cut their bread. The little information provided about types of injuries suggests that most were inflicted wth a knife, axes taking second place. The education of boys was based on the exaltation of physical force and it accustomed children to endure it, through the corporal punishment inflicted by parents on children, by masters on apprentices and by teachers on pupils. Character was also built by rough games, tournaments for the nobility, friendly fights with neighbours and trials of physical strength between teams from different villages on feast days. In short, everything combined to make violence acceptable, and even seen as satisfying a need [...]."

51:  "To learn how to fight with a knife was a duty, an injury inflicted or received was an honour and a homicide that resulted was a feat of arms, even if it was condemned by the law and the church."

52:  "Though varying according to country, region and parish, these festive interludes, Sundays included, added up to well over a hundred a year."

54:  "The young embodied the hopes of the parish, its chances of survival in a hostile world deeply scarred by famine, war and epidemics. Every European village was an entity with a stable core but shifting contours, and much energy was put into preventing external dangers from threatening its collective existence. Economic and matrimonial exchanges with othe parishes were closely supervised to ensure that they did not have a worringly weakening effect. The dominant model of marriage, therefore, was fundamentally endogamous and homogenous, as more than three-quarters of the rural population married someone from the same place and the same social rank. Villagers were trained from a tender age to defend their territory and their rights against any encroachment."

55:  "As their own parents sent them out to work during the day and encouraged them to spend as little time as possible within the house, world of the very young and site of adult sexuality, they were forced to invent their own sociality."

55:  "Emerging in the twelfth century, perhaps even earlier, they developed until the eighteenth century, before disappearing at various dates in various regions under pressure from the moralists who denounced their excesses. They were a response to the increasingly late age of marriage in Western Europe, regarded by demographers as the principal mechanism for population control in the absence of widespread and effective contraception, as it reduces the number of children conceived per couple. In France, the age of marriage for men was between twenty-eight and thirty on the eve of the Revolution, whereas it had been more like twenty-three at the end of the Middle Ages. Thus pubescent boys were forced to undergo a very long period of waiting before they could accede to full adulthood and a legitimate sexual life."

55:  "Historians no longer believe that the mass of young unmarried men opted for continence. Illegitimate births may have been less than 1 per cent in French villages in the seventeenth century, but plenty of outlets existed. These ranged from masturbation [...] which was sometimes heterosexual, as in seventeenth-century England, to furtive embraces with married women and widows, by way of prostitution, rape--then not really considered a crime--and even beastiality."

56:  "The youth groups, kingdoms of manliness, encompassed all the boys of the parish, but split into smaller groups according to the occasion and to affinities, perhaps sometimes also in line with social status. In the typical village, with a population of a few hundred, the boys might form a single band, a dozen or more strong. In big parishes, and especially in the towns, there might be many groups, organized by district. A 'king', a prince or an 'abbot', that is, a leader, was appointed each year, at a major festival, usually after a trial of strength or skill from which he had emerged the victor. A new member, who could hardly refuse to join on reaching puberty, paid his dues in the form of money or drink. He began by learning the traditions, acting as lookout for his elders, carrying their cloaks or weapons, undergoing initiation rites which marked the abandonment of childhood for the state of young man. His fellows might include some married men, especially in the first year of their conjugal life when they were still without children, sign of full transition to the adult state."

56:  "These events had a positive value for the competitors, clearly delineating their exclusive rights to a territory or to the matrimonial opportunities existing within it."

57:  "Particular targets were elderly widowers who had married a young girl, thereby depriving the young men of an opportunity in what was already a very tight marriage market."

57:  "The kingdom of youth were not simply assemblies of frustrated young men who found some compensation by engaging in acts of violence and various excesses. This harsh view of them, held by moralists eager to see them disappear, fails to appreciate their deep rootedness in the society which produced them."

58:  "Forged in childhood, brought to a peak within the restrictive context of the abbeys of youth, their culture of male power had only a single objective: to prove that they were equipped to replace fathers and impregnate women, even though access to the latter was officially forbidden before marriage."

58:  "A formidable xenophobia was practised against strangers, vagrants and soldiers, including those of the prince, because they pillaged and raped without scruple. The same defence mechanism was deployed against near neighbours, though more nuanced due to the need to maintain relations with these 'false strangers', especially if they lived within a radius of four or five kilometres."

59:  "Beyond ten, and even more twenty, kilometres, the frontiers of a little *pays* with common cohesive features, lay a world which provoked not so much aggression as fear in those who ventured into it."

59:  "A quarrel about a child, an animal or a right risked degenerating into a petty war, gradually involving two factions or two neighbouring communities intent on fighting with whatever weapon lay to hand."

59:  "The culture of violence was not simply a law of force."

59:  "Such precepts regulated the distribution of space. The house was regarded as an inviolable sanctuary, especially at night. An attack on it merited unanimous disapproval and was enough to excuse a homicide committed in its defense."

60:  "It was unacceptable to enter a house without permission, or even stray within its safety zone, sometimes marked by a hedge, more often invisibile, though still known to everyone."

60:  "All other space was common to varying degrees, subject to traditions which had the force of law."

60:  "The fields, the paths and the woods were not neutral zones, even if everybody frequented them and some spent time there. Only the unmarried men dared to go there in a group at night."

60:  "The busiest places, such as the village square, the church, the cemetary and the tavern, were also those where violence was most likely to break out, and from which it was hardest to flee in the face of the hostile intentions of an enemy met by chance."

61:  "Violence was employed here [public places], as in the village squares, to make the act clearly visible and highly memorable, so as to enhance the honour of the perpetrator and his family, even if it was a simple peasant farmer."

63:  "The tavern, principal site of village sociability, was a microcosm ruled by strict norms. Its 'politeness' was not that of the 'civilizing process' described by Norbert Elias. The codes in operation there may seem crude, but they were effective enough to allow individuals who were armed, extremely touchy about their honour and increasingly quarrelsome as the drink flowed to spend long hours, even whole days, in each other's company. Convention demanded that a new arrival greet the company, wait till he was invited before sitting down with anyone, and leave his most formidable weapons propped up against a wall; they were in any case difficult to manage within such a restricted and often overcrowded space. Yet people were rarely separated from the knife they used to cut their bread, which was one of the last resorts, with heavy pots, in case of attack. For reasons of security, metal pots often had a glass base and bread knives were often put down in front of their owners, where they could quickly be seized if the need arose. The fact that space had to be shared did not mean that people crowded each other. Everyone had to keep to his own place, that is, the space assigned to an individual or a group, separated from that of others by invisible but very real barriers. Entering or leaving the tavern, even to satisfy a call of nature, had its risks. If you passed too close to someone it was important to signify the absence of hostility by a word or gesture, so that they did not feel threatened. Leaving the inn was particularly dangerous, as an enemy might seize the occasion to bar the way, lie in wait outside or claim he had been jostled or challenged. Once over the threshold, the tacit guarantees of non-aggression associated with the collective gaze, which imposed peace and accepted the validity of a conflict only if certain conventions had been observed, no longer applied."

63:  "The ritual prolonged that of the laying down of weapons and framed two uneasy moments, because a seated man was in a weak position in case of sudden assault by a person on his feet."

64:  "To steal a personal item, especially a weapon, or a hat or a feather, was guaranteed to enrage the victim. The more direct challenges which began in the form of a joke were hard to take if the impugned the victim's honour. To pull someone's beard was an intolerable insult, because this hirsute adornment was evidence of its owner's virility. Worse still were the jokers who urinated from an upper room on to a table below, or into someone's hat, or onto their feet, well aware of how deeply offensive their act was. In marking their territory in this way and in announcing that their masculinity was superior to that of their victim, they initiated a trial of strength which quickly lost its playful dimension. It was rare, however, to utter in public the supreme insults, those which concerned the purity of the women of the enemy's family, above all his mother. As in the French banlieues of the twenty-first century, to tell a young man to go screw his mother left him with no alternative other than a violent response to avenge the insult."

65:  "they all ['rough music,' etc] evoke the fundamental right to supervise morals devolved on young males in European peasant societies until the Reformation and Counter-Reformation imposed the new social discipline. This custom reveals the function assigned them in exchange for their acceptance of the social norms and constraints: to act as the conscience of the community and periodically to rebind the ties between it and the nourishing earth."

66:  "All over Europe, the young men of two villages, or, in a town, those of a parish, competed with the married men in sporting contests of great brutality focused on a ball that was closely contested for hours on end over the whole of a territory."

67:  "These events, hymns to manly strength, culminated in the fights between animals and the games which culminated in their death."

73:  "No sector of the population was immune to violence, though some came out of it better than others, suggesting a familiarity with weapons and fighters."

74:  "The murderous brutality of the nobility was at its height in the fifteenth century, when it accuonted for more than a third of cases, but it subsequently diminished, to settle at about 4 per cent in the middle of the seventeenth century. By this time, the pardons were almost all for gentlemen of minor importance, often soldiers. Everything indicates that the aristocracy withdrew on a massive scale from ordinary socialibility in favour of cultivating their pride and redirecting their violence into the fighthing of codified duels."

75:  "The ritual battles among the young men of Artois were not aimed at doing their competitors to death. Their purpose was rathe to demonstrate the superiority of the victor. This explains why they usually involved the knife, that penis substitute. Only a few men, victims included, did not ostentatiously carry this extension of the self."

77:  "The intention was not usually to kill. The combatants were well aware that to hit someone in the belly or the chest with a thrust with a sharp implement or a shot from a gun, or to strike someone between the shoulders, an event rarely mentioned because it implied an unacceptable treachery, had much more serious consequences than a blow to the head."

77:  "Young bachelors who fell out with someone usually wantetd to hit him on the head, not send him to his grave, in which case they would be forced to go into exile to escape justice; they wanted to 'give him one' (a wound) and then boast that they had got the better of him."

77:  "The head was for them the symbolic centre of manliness. It was the same with the nobles, who fought wearing elaborate and feathered helmets intended to terrorize their adversary. Like the shameful member, as it was then called, the head out in normal circumstances to be kept hidden, while expressing various ways the unbending power of its owner."

77-8:  "It was an act of bravado to go out proudly sporting a feather in one's cap as a symbol of manly strength and challenge to any possible rivals."

80:  "The knife fight and the sword fight were part of the symbolic language of youth, intended to demonstrate the manliness of the protagonists. Despite accidents, exceptions and madness, it was not, in general, an art of killing. It was aimed rather at humiliating, by hitting the most highly valued part of the human being, the head."

81:  "It seems that the lust to kill became more common at this period, a sign of the crisis being experienced by the culture of youth violence. The authorities examined the circumstances and the descriptions of the injuries with a new attention, because the criminalization of homicide happening all over Europe in the 1620s meant that they reacted with greater severity. The defence of honour and vengeance, which had motivated more than half the aggressors in Artois in the fifteenth century, slowly became less common, settling at a third of the total in the period 1630-60. To be more precise, the high level of princely leniency in such matters was reduced in this period in the Spanish Low Countries, as the law, modernized by royal edits of 1570, created an increasingly negative image of homicide within society. At the same time, rural traditions were being eroded by the decline of festive activities, under pressure from a restrictive new morality and a legislation directed against profane entertainments, dances, the carrying of weapons, drunkeness and all the liberties allowed to young men, in particular that of walking around in armed groups at night and on holidays. A new world was slowly emerging in the countryside, that of self-control and the 'civilizing process'."

Chapter 4: The Urban Peace at the End of the Middle Ages
---

82:  "The only social space in Western Europe where different values prevailed was the city. This had probably been the case from the beginning, as towns had revived, long centuries after the fall of the Roman Empire and urban model, by claiming privileges and by slowly establishing a third way between the dominant world of the aristocracy and the world of the peasantry."

83:  "The most dynamic urban world was that of economic relations. It was not immune to the oppressive influence of the society in which it functioned. Lethal violence was at a high level. [...] But a wind of change was blowing in these worlds, in which peace was more necessary than elsewhere. This was not simply for moral reasons, but rather to make the town attractive and wealthy, assuring the safety of those worked there or came there to conduct their business. Places of exchange, by definition, the public square and the tavern could not be the scene of ritual confrontations, as they were in the countryside, without ruining the city's reputation. The maintenance of order was an absolute priority. [...] In the space of a few generations, the towns invented specific forms for the pacification of the manners of their citizens and achieved a spectacular reduction in violence. This was done using very different techniques from the public spectacle of torture later employed by the absolute kings. The towns acted simultaneously on three fronts: prohibitions to limit the occasions for brawls; the organization and supervision of population groups, in particular turbulent masculine youth; and systematic punishment, but by fines, and only rarely by physical punishments."

83:  "Towns did not foster crime. On the contrary, they were always trying to soften the rough manners of their inhabitants, who were protected by the town walls, watch and guard and by its reassuring legislation."

85:  "Violence, it has been claimed, was above all a phenomenon of the upper ranks of the patriciate, especially the young. This was not only because these privileged persons had the time to walk the streets and frequent taverns and markets, but because they regarded violent confrontations as a normal part of their lifestyle and because they had the means to pay the price, which was set a high level by the authorities."

85:  "What we need to retain from these partial records is the fact that violence existed in towns, but that they were relatively protected islands in a sea of great brutality."

86:  "THe principal ordinances were regularly republished on the first Sunday after All Saints' Day, then just before the night of the feast of St John Baptist. They reiterated, in particular, the regulations regarding strangers, persons of ill repute, the game of dice, going out at night without a light or sleeping with girls in the stews, carrying arms and the closure of the gates after the last bell."

87:  "It primarily reveals waves of strong anxiety when enemies came close, epidemics raged or threatened or life became, for some reason, harder. The principal fearrs of the municipal magistrates emerge, nevertheless, with some clarity. They were concerned above all to prevent the formation of any stable criminal associations within the walls."

88:  "The crafts and the population groups supervised their own members and proved impenetrable to all those they would not accept as one of them."

89:  "The town was a machine for producing social consensus."

90:  "Urban stability came at a price, that is, the exclusion of those without jobs or homes. Many people wanted to settle in the cities, in particular many rootless young men driven out of the countryside by demographic pressure. Only a few, however, were permitted to penetrate the local network of solidarity and share in the collective peace. Outside the gates, they mingled with the throng of locals banished for having broken the law. Towns would not accept those who were dangerous. On the contrary, their existence was based on a systematic rejection of those who did not share their values, even if this was for lack of material means. They were scarcely more welcoming to the peasants who sought refuge within their walls in time of war, or to any animals that threatened the security of the population [...] Beyond the walls, the immediate periphery was a crowded world, home of the exluded, the banished, robbers who preyed on travellers, dealers of every type, pimps and women of easy virtue."

91:  "Town air softened. At least, it obliged everyone to master their impulses and desires so as to avoid being relegated to the other side of the walls, to join those who did not know how, or did not wish, to exercise a similar self-control or display the signs."

91:  "During the golden age of the cities, up to 1520, the construction of a culture of pacification was achieved here through the definition of a new type of personality, an individual who restrained his brutality, preferred compromise to bloody vengeance and gave proof of his normality in every sphere. This citizen of the new wave, an advocate of the prudent management of the passions and of the happy medium, probably took his model from the old Western monastic tradition of asceticism and continence, adapted to a world of exchanges and expansion. Nevertheless, the religious element lost ground to a morality of success."

92:  "His [Erasmus] aim was not to form a warrior but a person well versed in the codes of human relations, a 'citizen' in the Latin meaning of the word, that is, a person polished by the world in which he lived."

92:  "Good manners, whose principal utility was to defuse aggression, were born in an urban context much earlier than Elias claimed. They were already strongly developed in the Italian cities of the thirteenth century."

93:  "In the eyes of the municipal authorities at this period, violence and rape were often seen as normal activities of young men who remained unmarried. As a general rule, the urban sources say little about homosexuality."

96-7:  "Urban cohesion was not an empty phrase in the Low Countries of the fifteenth century. Each town promoted it systematically, to make it a conditioned reflex on the part of the inhabitants. The network of sociability was so dense that it prevented undesirable, dangerous or violent strangers from establishing themslves. The old xenophobia, which had assured the cohesion of rural parishes, operated even more strongly here. However, if the rejection of outsiders was carried to extremes it risked impoverishing the community in every way."

100:  "The city was in the process of inventing adolescence. The young men were allowed a considerable festive lattitude, as long they moderated the excesses that were dangerous to the reputation and hence prosperity of the city. The hard cases, the knuckleheads, were punished in proportion to their acts and their financial circumstances. The aim was to put them back on track by teaching them to practise the middle way, to exercise the self-control that alone could save them from trouble and impoverishment. The morality taught was primarily practical and personal, not as religious as it later became under the rule of the absolute monarchs: anger cost you dear, it said, and violence led to exclusion from the urban paradise."

101:  "The patriciate that ruled these towns constituted a powerful hereditary oligarchy. It was freeing itself from the bombastic and brutal culture of the conquering princes and nobels, preferring a culture of the happy medium, oriented towards the quest, as discreet as it was obsessive, for profit and power."

102:  "the judges did not see murder as a threat to the social order."

103:  "Urban justice had invented an ingenious system for educating the brutish of all ages and for training the undisciplined young; that is, the fine. Together with corporal punishment and the death penalty, both used in moderation, the tax on crime affected a very large number of people. It punished, but it also reintegrated after payment, and it left offenders with the painful memory of a heavy financial loss associated with a failure of self-control. It thus instilled conditioned reflexes, each individual learning, at his own cost, that a high price had to paid for succumbing to anger."

105:  "a good part of the town's ordinary male population, and probably the majority of its unmarried men, with the apparent exception of those of good family, may have been involved in the space of a generation. The circulation was rapid, and it was even possible to leave, with a promise to return, if the process dragged on too long. Prison society was organized, with its hierarchies, its bosses, its rich and its poor. It is doubful whether a short spell in such a place meant social disgrace. Rather, it was an opportunity to ponder the fact of an inability to control one's violence, and it thus became a step on the road to a degree of wisdom by making the negative consequences of a violent act both concrete and painful."

106-7:  the fine and the jail "shaped an original urban mind-set by replacing the law of vengeance with that of personal interest."

107:  "The fines reveal the existence of trades whose members were quicker to resort to violence than others: butchers, bakers, fishmongers, fullers, masons, shoemakers, carpenters and innkeepers. Among those who frequently got themselves hit were ecclesiastics, wine-sellers, barbers, merchants and, above all, male domestic servants, who provided twenty-two victims but only five aggressors. Sergeants, prostitutes and owners of stwes were equally represented in both groups, revealing both the extent to which their occupations exposed them to fights and their readiness to defend themselves."

115:  "The high level of attention paid by the magistrates to the most trivial acts of violence, which were immediately punished, recalls the 'broken window' theory of today, found especially in the United States, which advocates an immediate response to the least sign of an increase in danger."

117:  "Why, it may now be asked, were these little-known--because little-studied--practices replaced by the 'spectacle of torture' imposed by the great monarchies from the sixteenth century on? [...] It probably lies primarily in the progress of the new, centralized, repressive model, which offered better control of the neglected intermediate spaces."

Chapter 6: Cain and Medea: Homicide and the Construction of Sexed Genders (1500-1650)
---

119:  "This fundamental shift in perception [violence no longer viewed as acceptable] began in the sixteenth century. It was originally a product of the radical change in judicial practice in Western Europe between 1550 and 1650. As the Renaissance gave way to Baroque civilization, the modern state, everywhere based on a single church claiming a monopoly of the care of souls, experimented with more effective methods of social control so it could best fulfil the missions devolved on the prince: to defend the truth faith, to keep the peace, to impose the law and to promote the collective good. To make the monarch wholly credible in the eyes of his people, by providing them with the 'good policing' necessary to the common good and the safety of persons, the lawyers proceeded actively to criminalize certain types of deviance. This 'invention of the penal' is well known to specialists, but its true significance has not always been appreciated. The spectacular tortures inflicted on regicides, homosexuals, witches and those who contested the dogmas of the established religion have monopolized attention. This has obscured major phenomena, commonplace but crucial: the surveillance of bodies and souls was increased not so much through fear of public execution and exposure of the shameful remains as by the construction of a new type of relationship between the spectators and the soveriegn powers."

120:  "an obvious fact that is too rarely taken into account: every power needs a minimum of consensus regarding the theories and practices it seeks to get accepted. Modern justice was not simply imposed on the masses. It seemed to many of them to have advantages [...]."

120:  "It is for this reason that homicide and infanticide were literally invented as inexpiable crimes from the first third of the sixteenth century, during a veritable 'judicial revolution.'"

120-1:  "The very spectacular and elaborate staging of the corporal punishments designed to punish murderers, a majority of whom were young unmarried men, defined both one of the worst imaginable deviancies and the opposite normative figure of the young man who was obedient to God, the king, his father and his master, curbed his aggression and no longer carried a weapon. Only the aristocrats, in principle dedicated to war, claimed this last right as an exclusive monopoly. The execution of women who concealed their pregnancy or killed their baby, most of whom were unmarried, revealed the only two antagonistic options open to the daughters of Eve, namely to opt for the devil, like the witches or like Medea, unnatural parent who exterminated her progeny, or be a good, gentle, timid and submissive mother."

121:  "The metaphor of the theatre of judicial cruelty is not new. To restore it to its full importance, however, we need first to clear away the false ideas surrounding it. The phenomenon was neither medieval nor linked to the ecclesiastical Inquisition. It was the product of a remarkable standardization on the continent, some time by the first third of the sixteenth century, of the battle against the threats regarded by governments as the most serious. In statistical terms, these were homicide, infanticide and violence of every type."

122:  "From 1550 to 1650, all states, Catholic or Protestant, indentified homicide and infanticde as two major and particularly dangerous forms of extreme turpitude. Theft assumed this role in the eighteenth century."

122:  "The identifiable common denominator in the repression of these capital offenses is not the 'absolutist' form of the state, or the evolution of economic structures towards commercial capitalism, or the overly vague 'civilizing process'. It is essentially cultural, that is, a massive Western effort, after the Renaissance, to impose an authoritarian control on the new masculine and feminine generations."

122:  "Adolescence was slowly invented as an age that was disruptive of internal peace, and which must be closely supervised so as to channel its unsettling energy."

123:  "Although it was neither uniform nor complete, the criminalization of homicide was generally achieved by the mid seventeenth century in most European countries."

124:  "Everywhere, the role of the criminal courts changed. It was no longer their principal objective to reconcile the adversaries, but rather to instil guilt in and punish harshly those who committed homicide."

125:  "The lack of denunciations [of beastiality], and even more of rumours, to initiate trials suggests a juvenile custom that was widespread but tacitly tolerated, as long as it was not performed openly and publicly. Similarly, non-aggravated theft continued, at least in the sixteenth century, to be treated leniently by the courts. Nor was it often prosecuted in the countryside, though it is abundantly attested by sources such as the ecclesiastical monitories. The magistrates' focus on homicide and infanticide, by contrast, resulted in their harsh repression, because the communities concerned were much readier to accept it and got something out of it."

126:  "The constant popular revolts of the period had a cultural dimension in that they represented a collective defence of traditions."

128:  "The strengthening of authority was an obsession of the age, at all levels. However, the means for achieving it were limited."

129:  "The growth of torture and the spectacle of public executions make sense from this perspective [lack of police]. The initial objective was certainly to terrorize those who were tempted to disobey the divine precepts of which the prince was the guardian. By demonstrating that the eagle eye of the king was everywhere, preventive dissuasion was also one of the principal missions assigned to the Parisian lieutenant of police. He was responsible, in particular, for maintaining grain stocks to prevent riots, and for keeping all suspects under surveillance, employing a large number of spies, or *mouches*. The nascent modern state was all the more eager to instil fear in that it lacked real means to punish the majority of delinquents, who escaped it. The excesses of this symbolic terrorization were slowly abandoned, from the second half of the seventeenth century, because the power of the central authority grew and its message was increasingly effectively transmitted by the principal heads of families in each parish."

130:  "The golden age of judicial torture was generally confined to the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries."

131-2:  "The judicial revolution of the sixteenth century was accompanied by a massive increase in the number of public punishments, executions in particular. Unlike the medieval towns, which had fined or expelled criminals, and the monarchs, who, through lack of resources, had concentrated their efforts on the 'atrocious' or 'royal' cases they saw as the most serious, the new justice aspired to educate subjects through a salutary terror."

132:  "All over Europe, capital punishment was a veritable sacred theatre, which conveyed many messages. First and foremost, it validated the power of the prince and that of his judges. However, it also demonstrated the power and prestige of the great cities: the gibbets at Tyburn, the scaffold erected in the Place de Grève in Paris and the Columns of Justice in Venice were symbols which made even the most hardened criminals blench, while at the same time reassuring honest folk. And it provided some sort of release for those who came with avid curiousity to watch the legal suffering of a tortured person, and tried to carry off some relic that had belonged to them for protective or magical purposes. The contemplation of a body humiliated, mutilated, martyred, tortured, hanged, decapitated, burnt or broken on the wheel both satisfied a well-documented popular taste for violence and blood and established a distance, as this gradually became a taboo. The public execution was a way of educating the sensibilities; it produced an effect of the sacred, by means of a gripping ceremonial that was the same all over the continent. It accustomed those present to withdraw from murderous practices in favour of representations of them, which were alone validated by the law. The constant repetition of this event in the towns attracted crowds from the surrounding countryside and it played a fundamental role in helping them to purge their emotions, as did the theatre of Shakespeare, Marlow and Corneille at the same time. Thus a sort of pact of an economy of blood was established between the king as dispenser of justice and his people. The latter began gradually to perceive in a more concrete fashion the importance of the Christian message of peace and the limitation of violence propagated by the sovereign, who claimed to have a monopoly on the killing of human beings. Paradoxically, life assumed greater importance in everyone's eyes by being taken away publicly, solemnly and seriously, without hatred or emotion, in the name of the justice delegated to the prince by God."

133:  "The theory was designed first to strengthen the sacredness of the royal person, in order to counter the tyrannicidal ideas circulating in troubled and unsettled times. Next, it led to an increase in the value put on the life of men of power and judges, whose assassination was punished in exemplary fashion, then on that of fathers of families, and after that, little by little, on that of all subjects."

136:  "So many meanings were attached to public execution because it was a prime site of cultural and social mediation. It played a crucial symbolic role, like human sacrifice among the Aztecs at the beginning of the sixteenth century. It should be seen as a sacrificial ceremony intended to produce consensus in a world which, since 1520, had been profoundly shaken by major crises."

137:  "the occasion was turned into a sort of grand gala around a scene of legal brutality, which replaced the old, bloodthirsty entertainments that were now forbidden, in particular the doing to death of live animals and the ritual armed battles between young men."

138:  "he [the executioner] was both sacred and contemptible, banned from society, so greatly was he feared, and he bore on his own shoulders the whole weight of the accumulated prohibitions, religious but also magical. His role was even greater: he deflected from the person of the sovereign the anger of those under his jurisdiction, although it was from the sovereign that he got his power."

139:  "They [the crowd] would not allow a hanged man who survived, or whose rope broke, to be hanged a second time. They forced the officials to respect the traditions of mercy."

139:  "The method of hanging then in use risked prolonging the agony, because the victim died not of a broken neck but by slow strangulation, struggling to the end. The hangman or his assistants or his wife often pulled on the legs to hasten his end. It was not unknown for the wretched victim's relatives or friends to force their way through and do the same."

140:  "This liturgy of fear, about which not enough is known, was designed to provoke fear in the living more than to punish the condemend in a notably barbarous fashion. Whether or not it turned people away from crime, it seems to have been successful in educating the population. The principal lesson they learned concerned the meaning of death."

145:  "The constant repetition of the punitive ceremony, some sixty-five times a year, that is, more than once a week, cannot but have linked youth to the potential danger it represented for contemporaries."

145-6:  "If they valued their lives, boys and girls were told, in no uncertain terms, not to imitate Cain, for the former, or Medea, for the latter. Families and those who watched executions had to be convinced, too, so that they would supervise more closely the children whose potential excecesses threatened the validity of the social pact. The age of terrifying speeches delivered by the condemned at the foot of the gallows lasted for a century, the time that was needed for it to be accepted gradually in the core communities. In two or three generations, the task was complete. This is the reason for the marked and rapid decline in bodily mutilations, death sentences and the use of torture by the second half of the seventeenth century, well before the emergence of the philosophic Enlightenment."

146:  "With the exception of Amsterdam, where there was a temporary rise in the half-century 1700-1750, before a new decline, England seems to have been alone in Europe in increasing the use of capital punishment in the Age of Enlightenment."

146:  "Forms of execution also became more humane everywhere."

147:  "Contrary to the thesis of Michel Foucault, the softening of punishments was not an eighteenth-century phenomenon, but dated back at least to the middle of the previous century. From this period, the rapid reduction in the number of death penalties went together with the spectacular decrease in the number of homicides."

147:  "manliness was fundamentally ambiguous, because, while the law demanded obedience and self-control, society lauded an aggressive potential necessary to the common good."

147:  "On the part of a woman, however, violence was universally perceived as abnormal and deeply wicked. It revealed the dark, dangerous and frightening side of femininity as it was imagined by the men of that period. A wife who killed her husband or a maidservant who killed her master fitted a negative model that caused deep anxiety to the judges."

148:  "By the Renaissance, the difference between the sexes was spectacularly emphasized by all the European criminal courts. Men were essentially prosecuted for attacks on persons and property, women for witchcraft or infanticide."

148:  "While the alleged members of a demonic sect were vigorously prosecuted only in certain countries, which included the Holy Roman Empire, the shameful mothers who did away with their child were punished with great severity almost everywhere. Here, there was a universal precocious judicial standardization. Yet the act had not been seen as particularly criminal in the Middle Ages. Not only had it been difficult to prove, but it was largely tolerated by communities and served as a form of birth control in the absence of effective contraception. In France, in the second half of the fifteenth century, it had even been possible to get a royal pardon in case of prosecution for this offence. The new legislation suddenly put it in a radically different perspective. Women pregnant outside marriage were instructed to declare their condition to the civil authorities. The aim was both to prevent infanticide and to publicize the name of the father so as to ensure he made adequate provision for the child. Crucially, the judges were no longer required to prove its death. The onus was now on the woman to prove her innocence, even in cases of natural death or accident. In fact, the judges applied a presumption of guilt with regard to every woman who had concealed her condition and given birth without witnesses."

149:  "Infanticide, very broadly defined, became the unpardonable female crime par excellence."

150:  "Their crime was essentially that of women excluded from marriage and whose social position was precarious."

150:  "The typical woman found guilty of infanticide by the courts from the sixteenth century on was young, unmarried, of rural origins and humble background, often a servant, who had killed her baby at birth."

151:  "The remarkable dramatization of the problem throughout Europe was exactly contemporaneous with the great witch hunt. The aim, in both cases, cannot have been systematic elimination. It was more a matter of intimidating those who fitted the developing stereotypes, by defining the boundaries they could not cross on pain of losing their life. Men of influence, judges, witnesses and the 'better sort' in the parishes were alike in stigmatizing the aspects of femininity that were now found unacceptable, by constructing two repulsive models which stood one on either side of the only path that was morally acceptable: that of the legitimate wife and mother. The prosecutions for witchcraft and infanticide encouraged a similar deep shame regarding the killing of newborn babies and little children."

152:  "The fear of women, young or old, who killed children reveals a deeper masculine fantasy, a fear of the destruction of the community through the sins of women who escaped the control of men and gave free expression to their sexuality. The stereotype of the witch applied primarily to old women, in particular widows, who gave themselves, body and soul, to the devil. It was a metaphor for a sexual appetite that was unnatural, in the cultural terms of the age, because it was not expressed in the context of marriage and could not be fruitful after the menopause. Infanticidal young women similarly transgressed against the prohibition by slaking their lust outside marriage, seeking pleasure, not procreation, as demostrated by their reaction to the birth of the unwanted child. In reality, their condition was usually precarious. Many of them were servents and some were fatherless, which made them vulnerable at the hands of a master who abused his position to make sexual demands. But, in the eyes of respectable people, they were primarily seen as temptresses with dissolute morals."

153-4:  "In order to limit the supposed lustfulness of the daughters of Eve, censorious males invoked both the fear of hell and the fear of the pitiless justice of men. All over Europe, they constructted two feminine figures of inhumanity, the infanticidal young mother of an illegitimate child and the aged witch who devoured the corpses of babies, in an attempt to bring out even more clearly that of the docile wife whose mission on earth was to produce beautiful babies."

158-9:  "In France, the edict of 1557 was no longer strictly applied after 1700, when an alternative practice began to emerge. The abandonment of babies made it possible for desparate girls and impoverished married mothers to get rid of them discreetly, without judicial consequences. In Paris, the average annual entry to foundling hospitals rose from 825 in 1700 to 6,000 a little before the Revolution. Louis-Sébastien Mercier sang the praises of this moral advance, claiming it had 'prevented a thousand secret crimes: infanticide is now as rare as it was formerly common'. In fact, it simply assumed a different form, taken over by the community. In Rouen, for example, of the newborn babies received in the hospital, 58 per cent died before the age of one in the decade 1710-19, and more than 94 per cent in the years 1770-9."

160:  "It is reasonable to conclude, therefore, that the marked reduction in the number of public executions was one of the consequences of the strengthening of the state, because it gave its peoples a feeling of greater security."

160:  "The greatest fears were now concentrated around robbery, while the need to save one's threatened life grew less urgent in a society that was increasingly pacified and where fewer civilians carried weapons and homicide was increasingly rare."

Chapter 6: The Noble Duel and Popular Revolt: The Metamorphorses of Violence
---

161:  "It [the duel] was invented in the sixteenth century and it reached its apogee in France under the first two Bourbon kings, just when the great peasant revolts were at their height."

162:  In the context of constant war, revolt, and revolution, the civilizing process nonetheless developed, as did state formation. "Of these, the most obvious is the gestation of the modern state, which needed to control the aggression of its subjects in order to channel that of its armies towards the fundamental sphere of lawful clashes with its enemies. The state took two antagonistic forms, whose mechanisms constantly evolved and improved in confrontation. The centralized model, as in France, was based on the upward aspirations of its most dynamic elements. According to the classic analyses, it harnessed some of the extreme violence of the aristocrats and placed it at the service of the sovereign on the battlefield. The other archetype is that of the city-state, whose power was based on a flourishing economy: Venice at the end of the Middle Ages, Antwerp in the mid sixteenth century, Genoa a few decades later, Amsterdam in the seventeenth century. However, the city-states had to adapt to the growing threats coming from the most powerful monarchies, tempted by their wealth."

162:  "England, protected by its isolation, was an exception. It moved slowly from the first to the second model, rejecting the absolutism of the Stuarts after tolerating that of the Tudors, to become a sort of vast economic suburb of London. Dominated by a capital expanding rapidly after the industrial revolution of the eighteenth century, it kept up the semblance of a monarchy. After the Glorious Revolution of 1688, it was ruled by an elite with urban values which distruted excessive centralization and favoured the separation of powers. This is shown by a deep crisis of the aristocracy, whose essential values came increasingly to be based on money and the entrpreneurial spirit rather than on birth."

163:  "The only legitimate culture of violence became that of the soldiers and officers acting on the orders of the state. Civilians had to accept the loss of their weapons and had to entrust their safety wholly to the law and those charged by the sovereign with the maintenance of order. It took generations, even centuries in some cases, for such principles to be accepted universally."

163:  "The noble duel and the rural revolt were collective or individual adaptations to the new codes that were being imposed. In each case, the participants claimed an eminent right to a straight fight, even if it resulted in the death of the adversary."

164:  "the villlagers showed no interest in anything remotely resembling class war. Indeed, they rejected the new distinction, previously virtually unknown, between those privileged by birth and themselves, that is, between warriors specializing in mortal combat and tillers of the soil, enjoined to abandon their weapons and their brutal practices. The society they wanted to preserve was based on a clear distinction between the three orders, clergy, nobility and third estate, certainly, but they refused to accept the introduction of impenetrable barriers in daily life. Backward-looking, when they were being urder to look to the future, they tried to make time stand still."

165:  "Paradoxically, the proliferation of conflicts ultimately had the effect of disconnecting the culture of the professionals in violence from that of the ordinary people. Only soldiers were now considered to have the right to kill another human being, in the course of a 'just' war. Which, increasingly, they did. Medieval chilvalric practices, and the economy of blood practised by mercenaries seeking high ransoms for prisoners, were replaced by clashes that were increasingly often fatal, using very destructive weapons, cannons, rifles and pistols, before the arrival of the formidable sabres of the Napoleonic age."

166:  "It [the duel] was premeditated murder, rarely prosecuted at a time when an increasing number of ordinary people were being executed for this very crime. Its supporters, like the duellists themselves, demanded the outrageous privilege of a continuation of the right to kill a human being without paying the price."

169:  "[England] had already gone some way to eradicating violence by orienting it towards the spectacle of animal fights and codified bare-knuckle fighting, ancestor of boxing."

170:  "The duel was a French passion. It acquired unrivalled prestige after the middle of the sixteenth century because it epitomized all the masuline virtues necessary to the conquest of Europe and the world. To fulfil the monarchical mission of bringing peace and Christianity to the people, it was necessary to have access to men of war who knew how to kill in order to conquer and to be killed in order to safeguard honour."

171:  "The net result of these insoluble contradictions was to define the duel as an exceptional right which ought to be rare, no one but a warrior of blue blood being allowed to cut short a life without a properly constituted judicial decision."

172:  "These immature individuals [noble duellists] attached little value to life, even their own. All that differentiated them from the commoners who sought royal pardons was the extreme murderous fury of the codified duel."

173:  "For adults of their caste, the duel had at least the virtue of occupying idle young warriors and preventing them from thinking about turning their swords on their elders."

173:  "The avowed causes of the challenges related to women, quarrels about money, lawsuits and rivalries aggravated by questions of precedence or membership of hostile factions."

174:  "The duel was an elite military academy. It operated a ruthless sytem of selection, allowing only the most gifted in the art of killing to survive, which augured well for their ability to conquer in battle. Further, it gave the nobles a monopoly of carrying and wielding the sword, because the prohibitions emanating from the sovereigns were not applied to them."

174:  "The symbolic castration of the commoners thus achieved by legislation did nothing to stop the survival of the traditions of armed juvenile confrontations."

175:  "four out of five of their scars resulted from sword blows to the head, the face or the limbs, with those on the trunk or belly accounting for less than 6 per cent. [...] it was the last of these that were most often fatal. Military swordsmanship targeted the head in every sense of the word. It was not necessarily intended to kill, given the helmet. Further, a defeated prisoner might fetch a high ransom, especially if of high rank. The army was the main source of the technical education of the entire population."

175-6:  "The rapier of the musketeers immortalized by Alexandre Dumas, longer, thinner and more fragile, could only be used to thrust, so as to pierce a body. War changed its nature after the abandonment of the heavy armour that was easily penetrated by a bullet. Plume fluttering in the wind, the noble calvaryman swooped down on the common pikemen, firing and killing, then valiantly used his sword against one of his peers. He needed a new kind of bravery, skill more than strength, all instilled into him by three indispensable masters: those of dancing, riding and fencing. They all called for the same qualities of finesse, skill, edurance and valour to form a new type of conquering aristocrat. Under a veneer of politeness, provided first by the manuals of civility and then by the etiquette of the court of Versailles, the nobleman had never been so highly motivated to behave with animal savagery in a duel or in war."

176:  "The duel was a frenzied and savage hymn to death, sung by thousands of ambitious young men inspired by a 'race' prejudice which encouraged them to believe they were superior beings."

176-7:  "A history purged of the passion for the duel leads to a disturbing conclusion. The 'civilizing process' described by Norbert Elias was no more than a facade. Cruelty was more deeply hidden under imperative rules of civility, but it also became more extreme and more drastic in the specialists in the art of killing.:

177:  "By forcing nature and by producing a culture of death, the duel inaugurated a formidable shift towards barbarity assumed in the name of allegedly transcendent values."

177:  "Although there were many offenders among the commoners, it was the aristocracy, therefore, who were chiefly responsible for a volume of bloody violence that was on a much larger scale than tends to be believed."

178:  Victims of duels: "When age is recorded, which is in less than half the cases, it reveals the outh of the victims: almost half were under thirty, and only a negligible number over forty. The peak was between twenty-six and thirty, which has been the principal age gorup, in the case of both the accused and their victims, for homicides in the West from the thirteenth century to our own day. [...] The next largest group was of men between twenty and twenty-five, followed by an almost equal number aged between thirty and thirty-five. [...] Every twenty or thirty years, there was a collective eruption of deadly violence which involved mainly young men."

181:  "To kill became a crime, without exception, whatever the circumstances. The taboo is today virtually absolute. The most violent male adolescents constitute only a tiny minority. The ritual initiatory violence of the gangs is directed primarily against objects, as in the torching of cars, and only rarely with ferocity against persons, even in the case of rivals from different districts."

185:  "The immediate causes of the risings were essentially related to a deterioration in living conditions, following a great increase in fiscal pressure or terrible famines."

185:  "These rebellions, which were doomed in the face of seasoned soldiers and ruthless authorities, were actually an expression of a strong attachment to traditions. The rebels objected to the fiscal 'novelties' and, more generally, to any sort of challenge to age-old customs. They were respectful of the social equilibriums, of the king and usually also of the aristocrats, whose help they sought to obtain justice. Their prime targets were the excesses to which they were subjected and they frequently chose tax officials as scapegoats. Conservative and backward-looking, they rejected the advance of the modern state, but without theorizing their rejection."

186:  "However, the sociology of the rebellious crowds merits further study. They often included women, who were particularly active during the innumerable food riots but also present on many other occasions. No one has paid any real attention to the age of the men concerned, often for lack of information in the sources, but also for lack of interest in the subject."

187:  "One of the essential but neglected aspects of the popular rebellions was their expression, through acts of violence conveying a symbolism of opposition, of a refusal to accept the disappearance of the customary privileges of the masculine kingdoms of youth."

188:  "The great peasant revolts of the sixteenth and the first half of the seventeenth centuries were very different from the short, spontaneous 'emotions' when a small number of people from a rural parish or urban district came together to protest about a famine or for some reason or other. [...] It led them to break through not only the barriers of disobedience but also those of the deep xenophobia existing between neighbouring communities. These heterogeneous assemblies suffered moreover from a basic weakness, in that each group followed its own leaders and colours to go into battle. This made it much easier for the much more disciplined and better-armed regular soldiers to put these rebellions down."

189:  "The absence of deliberate massacres and the selection of a small number of deeply detested targets was also characteristic of the customary rites of violence, based, as they had been, on brutality but without the systematic desire to kill. Only the hated tax-collectors were are risk of being done to death and then dragged through the streets like a trophy."

189:  "The great peasant wars were a massive collective protest against new Puritan moral norms which were not fully enforced, but nevertheless seriously disruptive of everyday life; they were about more than the articulated demands, but, rather, symptoms of a profound malaise. They reveal a stubborn refusal to abandon the ancestral cultural traditions which extolled manly violence as a way of carving out a place for oneself in an unchanging world."

190:  "Meanwhile, under the influence of both repressive and educative processes on the part of the authorities, a new model of masculine behaviour slowly emerged, which banished brutality and excess. In the attempt to make as many young bachelors as possible abandon the ritual confrontations, they added the power of persuassion and shame to coercion. They put great stress on the cruelty of their games, the animal sacrifices in particular. This marked the beginning of a gradual transition which culminated in the transformation of the carnivalesque entertainments into sport, such as boxing in eighteenth-century England or football today. Once they became spectators, the participants, including the unmarried young men, were more in control of the pleasure the continued to get from watching men and beasts suffer, and they could identify with the players while indulging in an exuberance that was now frowned on in ordinary life."

Chapter 7: Violence Tamed (1650-1960)
---

197:  "The Western 'factory', which was engaged from 1650 to 1960 in a massive effort both to dominate the rest of the world and to respond on its own soil to the constant clashes between expansionist countries, came to draw an increasingly clear distinction between two forms of violence, legitimate and illegitimate. The former was essential to sustain the bellicose spirit necessary to the defence of the homeland and the domination of vast territories overseas; the latter came to be regarded by the authorities and by established people as disturbing, dangerous and disruptive of social harmony."

197:  "The result, nevertheless, was the acceptance, all over the continent, of a dual model of masculine behaviour: on the one hand, the 'imperial' man, capable of brutality when it was necessary or legitimate; on the other, the peaceable citizen, the good husband and father, happily fulfilled in a serene household."

199:  "Those who failed, or refused, to adapt to the demands of the civilizing process, of whom there were many, were potential targets for the courts. Their activities were judged not only according to the law, but also to the degree of danger they posed to the community. They had to demonstrate that they could at the very least keep their aggression in check if they wanted to escape prosecution."

199:  "The adult world succeeded in significantly limiting youth violence by deflecting it into external conquest or legitimate war and by ruthlessly criminalizing the remainder. Combined with the disappearance of great military conflicts from European soil after 1945, the end of the colonial era has destroyed this balance, leaving the field clear for some decades now to a new increase in murder and physical violence."

199:  "Between 1650 and 1960, violence was truly tamed in Europe. Not only were homicide rates in long-term decline, but before reading the absolute minima of the mid twentieth century, but the more ordinary use of force evolved towards less dangerous practices, both within the home and in public space. This, in the latter, bare-knuckle fighting, conducted according to precise rules, gradually replaced fighting with knives. The urban metropolis was the principal motor of change. Contrary to a widely held belief, the European town has done much to dampen down violence."

200:  "Contrary to a common belief, urbanization and industrialization did not have the effect of aggravating violence, but rather of lessening it over the long term. In both countries, however, the curve of non-fatal assaults rose, in precise inverse correlation with that for murder. In other words, conflicts were more frequent but their consequences were less dramatic."

201:  "In spite of the heavy costs incurred, charges were laid much more often in the case of property crimes, which emphasizes both the high degree of acceptance of the legitimacy of the law and the lukewarmness of the desire to take the pacification of human relations any further."

202:  "In Western Europe in the nineteenth century, it was primarily a sector of the young of both sexes who seem to have been unable either to assimilate the norms or to integrate socially that lapsed into delinquency. For both sexes, the process usually began with theft."

202:  "More generally, we are made to think about the displacement of violence from public space to the intimacy of the family. This novelty was of little interest to the authorities, as happy to see a reduction in visible conflictuality as they were relunctant to intervene in private life. The fact is, men of all ages preyed on little girls."

204:  "Until 1885, the excessive affection of a father for a daughter of between thirteen and sixteen did not seem illegitimate. Indeed, some fathers seem to have believed that their marital rights extended to their children, all the more so as the rape of a spouse could not prosecuted until 1991."

205:  "The large increase in the number of accusations of molesting or raping little girls is one of the many signs of the growth of judicial sanctions designed to soften the roughness of relations and extremes of behaviour within marriage. Regarded as he inviolable sanctuary of masculinity by the triumphant bourgeoisie, it was in practice the only place where aggression was legitimate, on the part of the master against the rest of the household."

208:  "The fall in violence and the reduced use of the death penalty were closely connected. They were the two faces of a same process, that is, the increase in the value attached to human life, an original feature of Europe and of the universal values it has exported since the nineteenth century."

209:  "The ultimate filter was criminal justice. It was aimed less at punishing the recalcitrant and those beyond redemption, or at rehabilitating them through confinement, in accord with certain normative discourses of the age, than at isolating them from the community and forcing them to undergo the training they had refused."

209:  "youthful aggression, meanwhile, was deflected in countless ways, in particular into sport, which was believed to produce healthy minds in healthy bodies, colonial enterprises and, even more, the defence of the endangered fatherland."

209:  "Nevertheless, in spite of a real reduction in the danger, clearly visible in the extremely low figures for homicide at the turn of the century, Europeans believed they were witnessing an increase in the ferocity of young men."

210:  "Europe was the only continent on the planet to present these features in the third quarter of the twentieth century. Lethal violence was a residual phenomenon, mostly associated with organized crime."

211:  "Might the collective price paid for the increasingly effective control of manly aggression have been the military carnage and the protest movements leading to violent confrontations?"

211:  "Western societies have made the policing of the urban streets a priority."

212:  "The principal change, which was slow to be effected, was the gradual expulsion from public space of the young, especially the young bachelors who had once fought in the streets at night and on holidays, to be put in schools and workshops, then factories and the army, through compulsory military service."

215:  "The urban masculine youth culture moved away from murder, which society was increasingly less ready to condone, to theft. [...] In a world where the gulf between rich and poor was increasing, and where temptations were more numerous, it was also a form of protest by adolescents against the authorities and those who were comfortably established. It was the act not of the poorest or the vagrants without hope, but rather of the children of the people, who felt they were getting a raw deal and who were feeling the pressure of the stronger moral and social constraints imposed on them."

216:  "London was on the way to becoming the largest city in Europe. Its population more than doubled during the century, to reach nearly 900,000 by 1800, and its per capita income fell sharply. Nevertheless, there was a big reduction in the number of murders committed in its streets."

217:  "Violence did not disappear, of course, but it became more trivial from generation to generation. Surveillance by the police and fear of capital punishment are not enough to explain this. The principal motor for change is to be found in the everyday control of the gestures of each individual by the community."

217-8:  "It seems to have resulted principally from changes in urban space, which had become overcrowded. In the last third of the century, in particular, many foreign observers commented with astonishment on the way Londoneers behaved in the streets: they avoided eye contact and they kept physical contact to a minimum by using their elbows rather than their hands to clear a passage; they did not look back if they bumped into someone, which might make it seem intentional. Reputation was not established in the street as it had been in the past, which defused some of what would otherwise have been inevitable clashes over a public challenge to someone's honour. The sites of sociability in which ordinary people congregated, the pub and the workplace, were probably regulated by even more imperative rules for the avoidance of conflicts, because they provided indispensable havens, set aside from the external tumult. To affect affable manners became a necessity so as not to appear a troublemaker. Respectability was not now associated with a fiercely proclaimed manliness so much as with a peacable demeanour that posed no threat to the order prevailing in this places."

218:  "Male violence, once it had been tamed in public space, seems to have been given freer rein within the conjugal unit, and even more against women who were not protected by their good reputation or a husband."

223:  "It therefore urged its most vigorous elements, including adults from the lower classes, to keep a watch on each other and to keep the young closely controlled, so as to maintain, in its preferred manner, a security which could not be achieved solely by the carrying of weapons and the death penalty. This is why political, moral, religious or economic explanations are not enough to explain the long Western march towards the goal of making homicide and physical or verbal violence a rarity."

224:  "What is of most significance, however, is that Western Europe had collectively achieved the lowest level of inter-personal violence that any civilization has known, under the direct influence of its principal metropolises."

224:  "And yet, in a recurrent fantasy, the big city is still seen as a dangerous and horribly violent place."

238:  "If violence was no longer the preferred method of resolving disputes and tensions in the nineteenth-century village, it was because villages were increasingly integrating into the surrounding world. [...] This revolution was greatly accelerated by the massive intermixing of young men caused by two world wars, and it was constantly kept going by major integration mechanisms, both formal, like the school and the army, and informal, like the cult of novelty celebrated by the mass media and the growth of leisure."

241:  "In a striking paradox, the beginning of the twentieth century saw violence become totally unacceptable among those who regarded themselves as civilized just when the terrible human butcheries of 1914-1918 were in preparation."

241-2:  "The figure of the murderous monster, which fascinates a wide public avid for horror, speaks of the final human boundary that is crossed only by rare individuals who must surely be insane or deeply unbalanced."

Chapter 8: Mortal Thrills and Crime Fiction (Sixteenth to Twentieth Centuries)
---

243:  "The colonization of the Western imaginary by cruel fantasies is surely more likely to have been a sign that the taboo on murderous brutality had been accepted, leaving space only for evocations of what had been forbidden. Transgression had become impossible, without being taken for a brute beast or insane."

244:  "Fictional violence, omnipresent in magazines, detective stories and many other media, served two opposing ends: it pacified the manners of pubescent boys, by offering them the outlet of mortal thrills without getting involved in action, but it also prepared them for this eventuality, as the terrible slaughter of two world wars testifies. The symbolic education in these two contradictory roles is what gives the crime novel its significance."

245:  "Rosset and Camus offered 'stories of our times', based on violence, love and ambition. They were often sandwiched between a moralizing introduction and conclusion and they taught their readers how to behave before the Law, divine and human, by providing them with examples of transgression followed by an ineluctable punishment."

246:  "This is a literature that insists on the terrifying divine vengeance which awaits transgressors. It seeks to persuade its readers to accept a pitiless punitive morality, after luring them into exploring an imaginary prohibited world."

252:  "The gallows was not there solely to punish. It was also a powerful education tool for the use of all who watched a human life end tragically. For the officials responsible for organizing this solemn moment, the most difficult part was getting the principle character to cooperate, so that they did not disrupt the desire consensus between justice and the watching crowd."
